Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricard Lops, and
today I'm here with the return guest, Doctor Sophie
Scott Brown. She's still a research fellow at the
University of Saint Andrews, and today we're going to
talk about her latest book, The Radical 50s, Activist
Politics in Cold War Britain. So, Sophie, welcome back
to the show. It's always a pleasure to everyone.
Oh, thank you. It's great to be back.
So, I mean, last time in our first conversation,
we talked about the history of European political thought,
anarchism, and some other topics. So why did you
decide to focus on the 50s in this particular
book?
Yeah, OK, so, in part, the book's a little
bit provocative, because obviously this idea of the radical
50s doesn't kind of chime or coincide with what
most people think of the 1950s. I mean, it's
quite interesting, really, it's a sort of myth that
university. OBSERVED that the 50s was quite a, a
kind of a dull time for kind of radical
politics, for several reasons, which I'm sure we're going
to get into and unpack, but just to focus
for the moment on why, why did I choose
1950s. So there was a little bit of trying
to be provocative, which touches on a larger question
of, well, When we're doing this periodization, and remember,
you know, as, as we discussed last time, narratives
about the past are so powerful in shaping how
we think about political possibilities in the present. So
when we're characterizing these decades. As sort of radical
or not radical or conformist, or, you know, sort
of anything, any of those kind of descriptions, what
is, what is that, I, I, I suppose I
wanted to know what's really going on under those
labels, what makes us label decades in such a
way for the first part, what are the markers
that we're looking for, and what else is sort
of happening around that? What, what is happening to
a bunch of assumptions and decisions that we're making
about what it means to be political and how
that's playing out at different times. So there was
all that going on, and then actually just broadly
on a historical level, it is quite an interesting
or challenging decade in the sense that obviously it's
the kind of peak period of that first stage
of the Cold War. And that's really kind of
remapping and reshaping the political landscape in a very
dramatic way, but in a way that's made even
more strange by the sense that it doesn't appear
to be dramatic. There seems to be this, you
know, an awful lot of really quite seismic events
happened during this period, not least of which obviously
the nuclear program, and yet, you know, the bigger
and the more existential and the more kind of
terrifying. Politics gets, almost the kind of converse reaction
is that in, you know, in places like America,
in the UK, um, in Australia, you know, there's
this huge emphasis on closing that off almost as
a kind of like, Dialectical response, like, the weirder
and bigger it's getting out there, the more we're
gonna talk about the home and talk about the
nation, and all these sort of very conformist, stabilist
tropes. So, I just was like, this is just
such a weird decade. I want to know what
was going on under the surface.
Uh YES, it's very interesting. Uh I'm going to
ask you to characterize that decade, a little bit
more, but I was just going to say that
also looking back at the 50s, at least uh
people on the left in uh when it comes
to economics tend to be a little bit fond
of that period because in the US, in the
UK and so on. There was, it was basically,
or there was basically a boom in terms of
left-wing economics and uh the social state and Keynesian
economics and redistribution and so on that lasted and
at least until the early to mid 70s or
somewhere around that. So, I, I mean, of course,
don't get me wrong, I'm not saying that the
50s and 60s were perfect. I mean, the women
were still Uh, very much oppressed in many ways,
and there was still, uh, colonialism, or at least
the colonialism in a more direct way and so
on, but at least that bit was also there,
right?
Right, sure, shall we, shall we, so shall we
unpack some of this? Yeah, OK, great. So you're
absolutely right. I mean this is part of what
makes this decade so gloriously odd because there are
so many different contradictions at play. Now, politically speaking,
in the UK at least, uh the 50s are
largely dominated by consecutive Conservative governments, but even then,
that's not as straightforward as it sounds. You begin
the decade with a Labour government, and as you've
rightly said, after the war in Britain, and just
focusing on Britain for the time being, cos that's
obviously the subject of the book, but, you know,
you get the implementation of the welfare state led
by Clement Attlee and the Labour government. And you
get the setting up or the kind of reinforcing
of the, uh, NHS and there's a push towards
greater social housing, and there's changes to the education
system, not all at once, but gradually and piecemeal.
Now, there are a few things that sort of
happen straight away. It is, now the Conservatives do
take this on, and there is this thing, as,
as you rightly pointed out. Again, one of the
dominant narratives is that this is a period of
consensus, the post-war consensus. Yeah. Recently, a lot of
historians have pushed back on this, and my research
certainly indicates that I think, I mean, it, it's
tricky actually, it's, uh, there were some broad top
line agreements about some things. Certainly the Conservatives did
not sail in and start dismantling any of these
things, that would have been incredibly unwise. But in
a way that's because this consensus will first. Firstly,
what agreement there was kind of rested largely on
the fact that none of these innovations were quite
as innovative and certainly not as radical as they
needed to be, and this is a major part
of my story. So welfarism turns out to be
this very mixed, uh, bag of tricks. I mean,
so. You're right. For some, it is just, you
know, it is the kind of rhetoric of it,
and the presence of it, and it's been couched
in terms of the people's peace and, and all
that sort of thing. And that kind of makes
a lot of people who have been quite radicalized
by the war, frustrated with the decisions being made
at top level. I mean, we are talking about
A country that, after the victory of Britain led
by Winston Churchill, kick him out and bring in
a Labour government. That's, that's quite eloquent about what
people felt at that time. And the 30s are
not so far away, that desperate, um, unemployment and
poverty created by the depression, um, systematic failings of
the government to respond to that. So that's all
going on. So, in a sense, no government's gonna
risk. Coming back on the welfare state, in another
sense, the welfare state's quite conservative. It was put
together by Beveridge, and who was actually responding from
a, a kind of trajectory of reforms that have
been starting to come along since the early part
of the century, like uh the people's Budget in
1911, Lloyd George, and that had had certain hiatuses
during conflicts and depressions. But actually the welfare state
belongs more to that era of reform, and critics
at the time, people like GDH Cole were saying,
well this is great, and uh we, you know,
we obviously think this is all positive moves forward,
but it's not going to be enough for the
world that we're going into. And I think that's
the important point. The welfare state in some ways
was already out of date even as they're beginning
to implement it. And with the Conservatives as well,
I think as such, so there's this sense to
which they're not having to do half as much.
As maybe they ought to, to really seriously redistribute
wealth and goods and um, head towards a more
seriously egalitarian society. So they're quite happy to accept
a kind of bare minimum program. And also, welfare
turns out to be a really useful tool for
controlling people, because suddenly you've got state controlled mechanisms
that are intruding into people's private lives at a
rate that's sort of not been known, certainly not
known before the war and is now becoming not
just kind of normalized, but. Professionalized as well, and
they're generating, they become self-perpetuating or generating. So when
you have the social services, suddenly you have all
this infrastructure to train social workers, suddenly you have
all this science about what constitutes normal behavior and
what's not normal behavior, and how you then implement
controls in order to maintain that. So, That is
just one classic example, and there are a couple
more which maybe we can touch on, of the
50s having this politics which is just very ambiguous,
never straightforward, and this is, it's, it's, it's really
hard to kind of ideologically classify. These are big,
complex, tangled issues where none of the usual political
rules or categories or theories. They, they kind of
can't handle this, they can't describe it, they can't
really articulate it, so it's a bit of a
failure in political language at this time to, uh,
similarly, something like the bomb, um, the, the bomb
is, you know, kind of being. Told, you know,
that this is the kind of security we need
against totalitarianism, but at the same time the bomb
itself constitutes this enormous existential threat, um. Yeah, so
there's all these kinds of sort of contradictions of
threaded right the way through the um 50s political
imagination, which is just making it very difficult and
this is partly why you do get this reputation
for it as conformist, um, and uh apathetic. It's
actually because people are paralyzed, they don't have the
words literally to describe what's going on around them
and. I think also, and perhaps we'll come to
this later, but what's going on in socialism and
the left makes this particularly difficult for people. This
is, you said this was a, a positive time
for left wing politics. Again, it was and it
wasn't, um, at the same time. Mhm.
AND also uh earlier I mentioned colonialism that it
was still ongoing, but actually it's in the 50s
if I remember correctly, that at least uh the
British Empire went on the decline, right?
Yeah, sure, so that is the other characteristic. I
mean, I work on, I work across um American
and European. Uh, POLITICS, one of the biggest differences
when you're comparing sort of counter, countercultural reactions in
Britain and in America is this transference of power.
America is in the ascendancy, but it's also redefining,
it's redefining and it's not redefining what empire means.
So you also mentioned, you know, that it's during
this point where kind of. The ideas, you know,
what constitutes domination starts to change as America starts
to assume much more of a kind of potent
global position. But Britain certainly is coming to terms
with the breaking down of an empire, and this
is, this is a difficult process. I mean, you
have a Labour government, many members of the Labour
government. Um, ARE firm imperialists, they support the empire,
they do not support the speed of, um, sort
of removal or retreat that, that is, that is
like realistically on the cards. And again, this is
the point where you've got the famous wind winds
of Change speech by Harold Macmillan, a Conservative Prime
Minister in 1957. At the same time you've got.
Some of the most punitive colonial um expeditions, Britain
actively supporting some of the most violent defenses of
empire or empire related crises. I mean, obviously, Mau
Mau is the one that immediately springs to mind,
but Britain was obviously, um, but Britain's also then
participating in other kind of these new neo-colonial enterprises
in. FOR example, um, but you've also got a
ventures, um, sort of militaristic campaigns in places like,
uh, Cyprus and, um, Malaya, um, and it is
actually, the whole period is, the conscription is still
in place. The whole period is still, despite being
the first full decade of peace, it's absolutely ridden
with, um, with conflicts.
Uh uh NO, you know, now that I think
about it, it's very interesting also because uh when
we talk about global politics, we tend to focus
a lot on the big players like the US,
particularly in the 50s with its rise and the,
the UK, France, and some others. But I mean,
uh if you look across the world, actually, for
example, there's a big contrast here in Portugal because
we didn't really participate. IN World War Two, so
we didn't have a baby boom back in the
50s and we were under a right-wing dicta dictatorship
under Antonio Salazar and even when it comes to
colonialism, I mean, because uh Antonio Salazar and later
um um Mar and later Marcello were uh very
insistent on keeping the, the African colonies. It was
only after Our revolution in 1974 that we finally
gave them their independence. So I, I mean, if,
if you look across the world, there were at,
at different countries there were different things happening. It
was, it was not like, oh there was this
uh boom, there was this economic boom and this
uh boom in welfare in the 1950s across the
world. Uh, NO, it was in particular places and
not others.
It was in particular places, but I think in
some ways those those places, because a lot of
this is emanating from America, which obviously at this
point takes such a major strategic role in how
Europe recovers with the Marshall Plan and what have
you. So in some ways, these ideas maybe have
a bigger footprint than they might, you know. Generally
have had, but you're completely right, I mean the
situation, the, the sort of, I think there's still,
I'd say, uh, you know, kind of the, sort
of, I guess the larger question is, well, what's
driving this sort of eerinesss if this kind of
these disputes around welfarism and what have you are
quite particular to places like Britain and in a
different vein, um. America and they'd actually already started
happening in places like Australia, but if elsewhere the
kind of, sort of, they were having different kinds
of struggles, I still think this is a period
that you can speak globally, this, this kind of
contradictoriness, I think has an international structure. I think
that's largely driven by this Cold War and the
fact that, you know, um, the, the Cold War
framework where you have this sort of, Uh, bipolar
kind of power play, and then, even those countries
that opt for non-alignment or in Europe, led by,
um, countries like France's attempt to create this kind
of third, um, sort of alternative point, it's still
all having to negotiate itself through these two visions
of what freedom and security. In the good life
is now, arguably after the, the 50s is really
the last point into the early 60s that the
USSR, this is maybe controversial, but it's the last
point at which they are truly the most serious
threat. After that, I think a lot of it
is more America dining out on the kind of
rhetorical value, and that actually there are other. Other
players that have more economic muscles than the USSR
after a certain point. But I think there is
this moment where people are asking questions, particularly when
you're juxtaposing these two different ideas of freedom, of
liberty, of, of what the good life looks like
and means, and there seems to be, even if
it's only a brief window. A genuine sense that
it will come down to a choice. Already you've
had like in Britain um authors like George Orwell
essentially saying to people, he was a devoted pacifist.
Um, AND he sort of says at one point,
the only reason that he switched his position and
said no, we must fight this war, um, and
I, you know, kind of initially he was also
a great critic of America, but he was saying,
you know, his view was that, you know, American
liberalism is less awful than the alternative totalitarianisms. So
I think anti-totalitarianism is something everyone's thinking about, including
in the places where they have dictatorships, but also
in those places like Portugal. Like France, like Spain,
um, you know, you're having a sort of very
totalitarian leaders who are having to play in a
different kind of, a very different global kind of
situation and are therefore don't have. The complete sort
of, they're having to negotiate some of that power
because they need to interact with players like the
United States. So it's, it is just sort of,
I think globally we can talk about this as
being a, a period of real flux and shift
and transition.
Yeah, uh, one very interesting question that you ask
at a certain point in your book is, what
is it to be political? I mean, uh, tell
us about that and was the notion of political,
of what it meant rethought during the 1950s?
Yeah, I think, I mean, I argue that it,
that it was, um, and I think. I mean
this, this was, I, I, I thought about this
very carefully when I was writing the book and
I was quite inspired by an Italian, uh, Italian
philosopher. Her, who, um, who I mention in the
book, but whose name completely escapes me now, but
an Italian philosopher who spoke about, who wrote a
sort of collection of essays on the unpolitical. And
this is also a very common idea in a
lot of anarchist milios too, about being unpolitical. And
a lot of people treat this very gingerly, because
they sort of associate it with concepts like the
silent majority, which is where, when you say, oh,
I'm not being political, but, and then you advance
a view. Which you think is more acceptable because
it's not political, but of course it is political.
So I sort of thought, OK, well what, what
am I, what, what are these people talking about
and what, what do I want to talk about
when I mean that the way of being political
changed, um, and I think what happens is. During
this period, and again, just focusing on Britain for
now though, I, I would argue you could probably
draw analogies. But I think more clearly than anywhere
else, especially with what, with the sort of things
that are happening within the labor movement, in the
British labor movement, you suddenly get this sort of
redrawing of the map, and it goes from being
sort of. The labor movement versus sort of conservatism
to being government versus people. Um, AND therefore sort
of, it, there, there comes a point where, and
I think this, this sort of brought home more
to the people on the left, um, perhaps more
strongly, that sense that you can use this system
of government to achieve the ends that you want
to achieve starts to wobble because now you've actually
had a, a Labour government serving out a full
term and, you know, and they've struggled. To do
this, they're asking questions about why they um why,
why they lost the election in '51 and then
they continued to lose throughout the 50s, they kept
losing like three successive elections and the questions are
why, why, why? And within the Labour Party, there
are, there are people like Anthony Crosland who are
saying, right, well we need to modernize, and by
modernize. WHAT he means is a very popular book,
um, Schumpeter about capitalism, socialism, democracy, and basically arguing
that we now have such a complex industrial democracy
that we can't do the sorts of things the
labor movement idealized, like, you know, grassroots community politics.
No, we just need a kind of. Uh, A
technocratic representative system that delivers the kind of baseline
needs of most people. That's what you need, that's
what you need to go for. And so there
is a shift within the Labour Party, the revisionist
side wants to take it in a more technocratic
direction. And I think that disappoints a lot of
the labor movement, which contains an absolute vast ensemble
of characters, some of which are very laborist, some
of which are very socialist, some of which are
sort of quite anarchic, some of which are very
liberal. It, it's a sort of large kind of
ecumenical movement, but at this point, it becomes clear
that. There's there, it becomes clear that there is,
um, the, the, the sort of the, the system,
if you like, the government, the bureaucracy, the civil
service is, is never going to be the means
by which you want to achieve these sort of
larger social ends that you've been desiring and that,
you know, kind of there will, you know, we
now complain in Britain certainly, there's very little to
choose between the parties. Most of them hold a
kind of similar position and you basically elect. You
know, someone that hasn't annoyed you quite so much
lately. Very, very little in the way of actual
ideological choice. And I think the, the kind of
roots or seeds of this start during this time,
this sense amongst the larger movement that we're going
to have to actually think about different ways of
doing politics. And then I think, so what the
book looks at is people, OK, well if we
can't rely on those parliamentary governmental. Um, LEGISLATIVE methods
anymore. Well, it's over to us, and what does
a people's politics look like, and how is it
effective, and how does it avoid becoming the thing
that it's most critical of? Because that's, that's probably
the sort of biggest issue or tension that a
lot of my activists face, which is obviously this
big nub of, the big nub of the problem
is how do we get things done in the
world without then the kind. Of paying the price
that comes with power, namely, that, you know, power
corrupts, absolute power corrupts absolutely. So, um, so that's
kind of a real central hum all the way
through the book. And that's, I think, where they're
most challenging, what it means to be political, that
they're really having to start imagining, imagining what does
politics mean when it's done outside of a political
setting.
Yeah. So let's talk more about that, about activism
in the 50s then. So what kind of activist
politics emerged out of this, uh, so to speak,
cauldron of uh political events and political circumstances? OK.
So, um Um, it was sort of pointed out
by an early reviewer, um, that actually, you know,
I, I'd sort of focused on a few particular
groups, and people said, well, actually, there was a
lot more activism than you're, than you're acknowledging. There
was a lot more, um, kind of, uh, sort
of community-based politics. What, where is, where is all
that in your narrative? And I sort of. Nodded,
um, kind of, uh, shamefacedly and said yes, you're,
you're quite right, there was, um, I chose a,
I chose a specific sort of, uh, I chose
my groups for quite specific reasons which I'll come
to in a minute, but I think, you know,
at this time it is, There are two things
going on. I think there's still a long memory,
especially within what I'm calling this wider labor movement,
and just to clarify, the labor movement's kind of
everybody involved in some description or some form of
social politics. That's why I'm saying there's, uh, it's
impossible just to say the Labour movement are Labour
Party supporters. Quite often that wasn't. The case. The
labor movement, broadly speaking, is sort of anyone whose
kind of central interest is in promoting varying forms
of, you know, kind of increased equality or um
or uh or quality of life for, for people
outside of the kind of usual, um, privilege or,
uh, kind of wealth. Uh, WORLD context. So, um,
So that was quite normal, that people, there was
a long existing tradition of people who would do
sort of socially orientated activities to solve a problem
within their area. Um, AND we're seeing actually a
resurgence of this sort of now, so in response
to the depression, communities often were resourceful, they banded
together to try and provide food, to try and
support with raising children. Um, THERE'D always been a
kind of community-led initiative towards looking after healthcare and
sort of health insurance schemes. All these sorts of
things already had roots. So in some senses what
we're seeing is a continuation of that. We're seeing
a generation, particularly of women, who are very accustomed
to doing this, and back in the 1950s they're
sort of. You know, that continues. There's always been
a sort of social reformer tradition, very strongly in
Britain, as I'm sure there is elsewhere. Again, a
lot of these are women, and going back to
the conversation about what it means to be political
or unpolitical, you know, a lot of these women
would say, no, I'm not political, but this is
a problem and it needs dealing with, so we're
gonna do it this way. Um, AND now obviously
the, that side of things with the implementation of
the welfare state is actually being put on a
more kind of professionalized footing. So again, it gives
with one hand, it gives people more power, it
gives people a better platform in order to say
and describe these are the problems and this is
what needs to be done. On the other hand,
it also makes them, gives them a little bit
too much power in some, in some contexts. So,
um, there's a lot going on and a lot
of things happening. But I suppose the activism that
I wanted to focus on was activism that was
really starting to be quite self-conscious in thinking about
how it was, how it offered itself as an
alternative form of political practice that could be sustainable
beyond just the issue it was campaigning on. Now
probably the biggest sort of most kind of iconic
activism of that period was anti-nuclear. Um, SO obviously
I look quite closely at them, but I do
so because at the same time, because of the
nature of the issue and because it's something that
all governments, ultimately even Labour, although Labour does prevaricate
over this issue, but ultimately the Labour leadership decide
they cannot possibly stand on a platform of unilateralism,
and anyone who recalls the 1984 election with Michael
Foote can tell you that that was. Probably a
reasonable guess. Nevertheless, um, all political parties are kind
of, you, whether they're left, right, or whatever, they're
all, none of them are sort of, all of
them are sort of supporting nuclear, so that leads
a lot of these activists to say, right, well
that's government for you, because all government, no matter
what color, you know, they all want that ultimate
weapon that will ensure their own security as a
government. Um, AND this really does start recalibrating what
it means to be, um, doing politics. And so
at the same time as they are quite seriously
part of this international global kind of protest against
nuclear weapons, and they are constantly thinking through ways
that they can impress this information as a public.
Information campaign about this. There's how do they deal
with these politicians, you know, what languages can they
use to engage them with, at the same time,
you know, they are trying to sort of say,
right, well, ultimately this, the only way out of
this is, you know, this has got to be
a sort of popular campaign on a scale never
before seen, so it's got to be like, A
mass campaign of moral consciousness is what they are
essentially trying to, trying to orchestrate. So they're doing
two things simultaneously, they're trying to imagine, Well, how,
you know, first of all, how can we practically
try and stop testing of nuclear weapons and try
to get Britain to opt out of the nuclear
scheme and consequently, you know, kind of, you know,
replicate that elsewhere. At the same time they're asking
themselves, well, if government, basically the existence of government
is always going to. Lead to these absolute existential
threats. How can we imagine ways of social decision
making that don't have to rely on governments and
therefore can ultimately lead to a lasting and sustainable
peace. So, anti-nuclear, again, in Britain and America, but
they are, and also. In America's civil rights, um,
these are groups who are doing a lot of
incredibly innovative, practical rethinking about what it means to
be political and do politics. Civil rights not so
much in Britain, although, um, the social demographics are
changing. You have the Windrush migration, and, you know,
especially in places. Places like London towards the end
of the 1950s, you've got rapidly changing demographics. So
there are a lot of questions around race and
racial integration and decolonization that is starting to be
asked. But I think in Britain, um, the most
kind of novel forms of activist experimentation come through
the anti-nuclear movement. However, the new left group that
I also look at, particularly the Student branch of
it are also starting to ask interesting questions about
how you do community politics in rapidly changing social
formations in new communities, like in places like Notting
Hill, which have a lot of racial diversity, but
also in the creation of new towns, which were
these entire new settlements that they were government funded,
that were set up to try and combat kind
of problems around housing and what have you. And
were very much intended as sort of engineered communities.
So those were the two main sort of spaces
I looked at. And then I looked at the
anarchist group, the Freedom Press anarchist group, because they
really are the ones that start to articulate a
kind of philosophical framework that can hold together all
these various different ideas about activist practice.
OK, so I think that at least to some
extent you've already answered one of the questions I
have here that was what kinds of political questions
did these groups contend with the most, but uh
tell us more about each of these particular ideologies
in uh in Britain in the 1950s. I mean,
how did anarchist manifest back then? What characterized it?
Sure, well, I mean, each of these, um, I
mean, this is sort of talk about trying to
hit moving targets. Each of these kind of groups,
so the new layer of the anarchists and the
anti-nuclear being a particularly interesting cohort of people, ideologically
speaking, um, but they're all in flux themselves, so
just to focus on the anarchists a for a
moment. Now, anarchism's always been, by its very nature
and by its very name, a sort of a
house of many mansions, and it's always had a
bit of trouble. Kind of coming to terms with
that element of itself. It's one of the kind
of great, kind of ironical paradoxes of it. Um,
IT'S a bit like philosophy, right? You ask a
group of philosophers what philosophy is, and they'll all
give you completely different answers. They'll all think each
other's wrong. Same with anarchists. So, with all that
as the background, nevertheless, you, it is. It's possible
to talk about there being a fairly recognizable, kind
of fairly organized anarchist movement that was quite closely
wedded to the socialist movement, um, sprung from sort
of utopian socialism, kind of grew up alongside Marxism,
but obviously huge bifurcation at the first, um, at
the first International. Uh, WITH the anarchists walking out
because they cannot accept the kind of authoritarian elements
that are implicit within Marxist theory, particularly around the
idea of the state as a vanguard in the
transition. So nevertheless, there's enough infrastructure there to talk
about a reasonably coherent anarchist movement that whilst I
think agreement would. BE too much of a stretch,
have some common features. So, these are anarchists who
generally think that the revolution that any revolution must
come from the people, and the people for them
tend to be the, the industrial working classes, that
the strike is going to be probably one of
your main kind of revolutionary revolutionary weapons. There are
some Certain other pockets like insurrectionists who don't believe
in that sort of level of formality, but do
believe that these sort of strategic acts of intervention,
often violent, you know, it may be enough to
trigger sort of larger kind of reactions or a
certainly disrupt kind of complacency or or or consensus.
But broadly speaking, the organized movement that we have
generally, maybe a bit lazily, but we generally have
come to term the classical movement, believes still in
a kind of worker led uprising, which will culminate
in syndicalism or worker control of industry via syndicates.
And sort of thinks in terms of a kind
of international kind of cooperative federation of different sorts
of working syndicates as a potential model. Largely imagines
a communistic type societal arrangement. Um, THERE'S debates about
that, some anarchists much more kind of hardline, um,
communist, others much more kind of willing to explore
notions like mutualism. Where there is a degree of
private property, um, involved, but much more on a
kind of exchange basis, um, than, than the kind
of current, uh, current system that we, that we
would use. So, All that is your kind of
classical legacy and inheritance, but then, I mean this
had been slowly kind of, sort of, along with,
you know, kind of simultaneously alongside socialism. This has
been sort of under pressure for a little bit.
There have, there have been points, particularly in the
20s and 30s, but also sort of previously, when,
if there was ever a time that the industrial
working classes. You know, could have risen up, could
have overthrown in, in particular places, particularly around the
point of the depression and what have you, that,
that, you know, that capitalism really did seem to
be dead and defeated and that, you know, if
history was on your side, then there was no
better time than now to move, and yet somehow
it had contrived to survive and to reinvent itself
and to come back in this. New form as,
you know, as the affluent society, marking very much
a switch from a sort of scarcity mentality and
a production based economic sort of drive towards the
consumer society and the politics that go with that
consumption. So you've got all this going on and
the anarchists therefore are digging around back in the
wider terrain of anarchism to try and find some
ideas that are actually going to be more, uh,
they're going, they're going to talk a bit more
directly to the new sort of uh social, cultural
and political landscapes that they're finding themselves in because
um there's a huge amount of disillusionment. With socialism,
I imagine that we'll get to 1956 very shortly,
but, um, you know, there is, uh, sort of
socialism is quite discredited in some of the claims
that it's been making, even if not in the
principles that it's been espousing. Plenty of the anarchists
in the group I look at would still say,
well, of course you need much more of an
equitable distribution of. Um, SOCIAL resources and goods before
you can even sort of talk meaningfully about freedom.
But what you get really, is a much stronger
infusion of individualist traditions, because the diagnosis is that
what's gone wrong with socialism, it's become too technocratic,
it's become too abstract and impersonal, it's kind of
marginalized the human. And the human experience from itself,
and ultimately it's offering a kind of utopia and
an ideal and nobody wants because it's very inhumane
and it means a loss of vibrancy and a
loss of creativity, and this is what we really
want. So in a way, what the anarchists are
trying to do, and I often think that if
you want a lens into the larger political landscape,
anarchism actually gives you a very privileged one. Because
it's engaging with all the same ideas as in
liberalism, as in socialism, even as in conservatism. But
what all it's sort of doing is trying to
imagine what would happen to any of these ideas
if you take the state out. And so it's
sort of saying to itself, well, is the problem,
is the reason that liberalism's hit this brick wall
and it's sort of, you know, settled for this
very kind of crass representative democracy which actually just
props up power and it's all sort of kind
of mired itself in bureaucracy and policy making. Um,
AND actually is its problem because it keeps insisting
on having a state to regulate all this. Is
the problem with socialism, well, they've always thought this,
they've always thought the problem with socialism was its
overreliance on a state which ultimately then ends up
repeating exactly the same problems it wanted to restore.
Um, CONSERVATIVES actually are, well, I mean, conservatives like
power. That's, that's all you need to, that's all
you really need to know. Um, BUT even so,
anarchists are looking into kind of conservative, it's sort
of a conservatism that's been sort of largely lost.
It's more of a sort of a kind of
a cultural conservatism in some senses, this idea that
people's identities. And their, um, values and their traditions
have, things that have emerged through years and years
and years spent living together and working together and
loving together and all that sort of thing. These
are being destroyed really quickly by technology, by the
imposition of kind of technocratic governments who just decide,
right, we're gonna put a community over there, and
we're gonna knock down your slums, and that's, that's
the end of that. You're going to live there
now. So there's even a degree which they're cherry
picking back into those sorts of. Um, CONSERVATIVE traditions
too, so anarchy at this time, it has been
called new anarchy, but again, that's something which has
many different flavors included, sort of thing. But broadly
speaking, the big kind of take home messages are
moving away from this idea that there's going to
be a revolutionary event, and that's going to be
quite final and mark a break, and that after
that things are going to change. Um, THERE'S more
of an idea that revolution's piecemeal, that it's gradual,
that it's about infusing. Um, SLOWLY or anarchizing if
you like, society piece by piece, bit by bit,
um, and that this is a kind of ongoing
or perpetual struggle that you're going to be engaged
in, that it's got to work across many fronts,
that this idea that one class of people are
going to confront power is nonsense, it's got to
appear in many different forms. It's even starting to
think about, well, you mentioned earlier, you know, um.
You know, we, we've got to think about what
power imbalance looks like for different people, like women,
like um people of color, you know, the, the,
they actually, it's not enough just to drop this
all under the categories of class, that doesn't do
enough work for us. So yeah, that is the
main switch in anarchism. What does it look like
when you take away the final kind of the
final event of revolution and you have to think
about politics as literally a way of life.
You know, while you were speaking, many things came
to my mind, but when you touched on that
bit about the people being disillusioned with socialism back
in the 50s, it's, and earlier you also mentioned
how some of these uh political circumstances express themselves
in the social sciences as well because it came
to mind that back in the late uh 40s,
it was not in the 50s but late 40s,
it was And BF Skinner published Walden 2, and
it seems that back then there were some people,
some of them who identified as socialists, others perhaps
even as technocrats who were very fond of behaviorism
because it was like, oh, we just have to
condition people in a particular way, and they will
become altruists, they will become this or that, but
at the same time there's that negative spin that,
OK, now there's a full. Absolute control over people
in a particular society and then people who are
at the top can use it whatever way they
want. And then there was also uh cybernetics was
also associated with socialism in a way which even
uh interestingly enough, uh manifested itself in uh uh
in Chile back in the 70s because he had
that project, that, that cybernetics project supposedly to Uh,
uh, ever distributed decision making system and, and all
of that. So, I mean, yeah, it's, uh, to
be uh plainly honest, it, there was a, I,
I'm not sure about today, but at least back
then the 50s, 60s, 70s, and so on, there
was a um at least a branch of socialism
or socialist technocracy, let's say that was very much
uh Non, or I try to eliminate as much
as possible the human element from political decision making.
Hm, no, I think, again, you touch on some
really important points there, so socialism, well, like, social,
I think all, I mean this is such a
period of ideological flux, like I said, because. Um,
THE kind of total restructuring of global power and,
you know, and also just this, this kind of
shift in, in emanating from, from America, but this
idea that, you know, now we've got to think
of what politics means, um, in a consumer-led or
a consumer driven economy. Oh, absolutely true. This is
not the case everywhere. Nevertheless, because it's, this is
the case in these kind of countries, there is
a knock-on effect for, for absolutely everyone else. But
coming back to your social science point, and I
think this was a really key one for me
in the book, because a lot of the, my
activists, I mean, this is. There's a very vexed
relationship with science in many senses, and it's one
of the fault lines that kind of start to
appear within the new anarchy or the new left
around these attitudes or feelings about science, and it's
one that marks out different generations from each other
as well. So, because, you know, as you're saying,
there, there's this sort of huge investment actually, led
from governments, certainly in America, and to a slightly
less degree, but nevertheless, in Britain. In the social
sciences, I mean, partly, it's, there's a real sort
of drive to increase psychological research, and this is
for a number of reasons. Initially, after the war,
there's some questions around, you know, they're genuinely sort
of wanting to understand how it was that whole
populations could have been sort of kind of enslaved,
like, you know, how did Nazism happen? But obviously
with the kind of pressing side question of, well,
you know, what happens to the individual personality under
totalitarian regimes, how are people kind of, how do
people think in the USSR know thy enemy sort
of thing. So there's a huge amount of investment
in all that sort of thing. Yeah,
and there were all of these sort of conformity
experiments, very famous conformity experiments from the 50s and
60s. Yeah.
Yeah, absolutely, sort of ones where you're like, oh
my God. HOW, you know, you wouldn't get ethics
clearance on that today, sort of thing. Um, SO
yeah, there were some truly scary, uh, ones that
went sort of right throughout into the sort of
60s and, and the 70s about sort of herd
behavior, essentially. Um, BUT then, you know, there's, there's
also, practically speaking, like, like we've discussed, the implementation
of the welfare state, actually sort of, in part,
it kind of, because suddenly you have, sort of,
things like education, healthcare. Social care being treated much
more efficiently by the government. I mean, it's all
kind of knock-on effect, really. So then the government,
because they're spending and investing money, need to be
sure they're doing this efficiently, or it's meeting the
kind of goals that they need it to, in
order to justify that, or to justify why it
costs more. So therefore, you need people who have
competencies. So how do you ensure that you standardize
what their job is, um, how do you do
that? Well, you invent qualifications for it. Um, AND
if you invent qualifications, you're gonna need people to
teach them, if you're gonna need people to teach
them, you've gotta have people researching it. And so
it goes on, and it creates a kind of
ecology around itself. And exactly as we've been talking
about, for a lot of my guys that I
look at the activists, it's a really mixed blessing
in some ways. They treat science as a wonderful
tool. I mean, the activists, for example, around the
anti-nuclear, because, like I said, they've constantly got one
eye on how. Activism can actually be sort of
reconstituted, reimagined as a sort of permanent form of
popular politics. Not all of them are anarchists in
the sense that they imagine this popular politics will
displace, you know, kind of the state or even
that they want it to, but they think there's
got to be a much stronger popular politics in
order to regulate the state from excess or to
keep it all the checks and balances in place,
so. They are really interested in those kind of,
you know, the, the kind of million pound question
on how do you get groups of people to
kind of come together very quickly, cooperate effectively, communicate
well, how do you deal with conflicts in those
intense situations where you're on protest actions together. Now
one of the people I look at was a
woman called Pat Arrowsmith, and there are actually one
of the most wonderful, joyful things about this book
is that when you look into the nitty gritty
of people actually trying to think and organize politics
differently, well, fantastic. Once you get past the, the
kind of writers and speakers, which were predominantly men,
you find there were some women doing some incredibly
rich theorizing and organizational work, and Pat Arrowsmith is
one of them, she's quite fascinating. She goes over
to America to study social sciences and at some
point, she's working with a group of experimental psychologists
who do this, um, form of science called group
dynamics, and they're working in Chicago, which has been
an absolute, historically speaking, an absolute hotbed center for
kind of, uh, kind of organizational theory and social,
social kind of, um, Uh, social organizing and grassroots
kind of practice, and she works over there on
sort of projects around race relations, how you integrate
very conflicted, diverse neighborhoods and you try and generate
this sense of community, um, through people with really
polarized views of each other and, and of the
world generally. And she comes back over there and
she's trying to apply a lot of these ideas
into their practice. And I mean, to be honest,
this is the, again, the other wonderful thing and
the other confusing thing for people is most of
the activists I look at, right, the spoiler alert,
uh, Ricardo, they fail, they, they, they, they don't
get what they want, they don't get nuclear weapons
banned, they don't get a new socialist society, they
don't get rid of the state. Um, AND so
there is that temptation, it's like a lot of
the historiography around each of these groups starts with
that, like, hm, they're, they're minor, they failed, they
didn't do anything, they didn't become a, So in
amongst the anti-nuclear groups, uh, there'll be a bit
more buzz around CND, not necessarily because the CND,
that's the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament, not necessarily because
they got what they wanted, but because they endured,
they sustained as an institution, whereas the groups I
looked at. Which were closely related to CND and
active in its setting up, but they were on
the um edges and the periphery. And they um
and they weren't uh, they, they sort of, they
didn't, they didn't survive the period, they disband and
disperse and go off and do other things later,
which I argue is actually again another characteristic of
this new politics they're forming. But certainly that group
where you're looking at how do you, I mean
there's a wonderful notion from Sheldon Wallen called fugitive
democracy. How do you get groups of people together
really quickly and get them kind of. Without, you
know, kind of, without imposing on them or without
being able to rely on a kind of shared
doctrine or anything like that, how do you get,
how do you enable them to all have their
individual views and stakes, um, and, and kind of
contribution to the process, but still get them to
cooperate and do so effectively, and that's the sort
of, it's definitely something that they're looking to things
like psychology for, sociology, anthropology. Anarchists have always been
obsessed with things like psychology and anthropology, and that
is a huge argument within the movement about just
how far that goes. There are some who are
very clear and categoric, science is a tool. Um,
IF you start saying anarchism is scientific, then you're
just falling into the same trap. I mean, in
some ways they see it as very, um, hypocritical
that you would talk about freedom all the time,
but then just say, well, actually freedom means conforming
to the laws of nature. Well, who's determining the
laws of nature and who says nature's in charge,
sort of thing. So, there's a, it's a really
vexed, vex, vexed issue. And then the new left
are actually, for the most part, because again, the
student cohort I look at, which was called, they
were the universities and Left Review Group. And because
they're actually, most of their activism is actually practical
research, they're going into these new communities or these
divided communities in London. And half the time, they're
not, they think they're going to campaign for something,
but then they find the situation so complex and
confusing that they just end up kind of saying,
well, we don't know, we don't know what's going
on. But they end up amassing a lot of
information about how these new cultures and communities. Especially
around youth and race, um, about what, how they're
emerging. And so one of the key figures that
I look at Stuart Hall, who of course then
goes on to be in Britain, one of the
foremost commentators about youth culture and about, um, racism
and black culture in Britain. And this all has
roots in the things he was doing as one
of the student leaders in the kind of, in
the kind of new left. So they are actually
doing something even a little bit different. They're kind
of, they're seeing the real limits to the kind
of science you're behaving, you're, you're describing, which is
head counting and behavior means this, and if you
pull this lever, the body will do this. And
they're saying so much of this depends on these
ideas about what it is to be human, what
normal means, what good is, what bad is. You
know, all these questions you're asking science to, I'm
not saying the science is not truthful, it is,
but it's only asking certain questions and those questions
don't reflect the experiences of young people in sort
of East London, or they don't reflect the experiences
of. Um, PEOPLE from the West Indies who are
building a life in Notting Hill, so they are
starting to pull apart at the limits of that
very empirical, behaviorist science. They're starting to ask questions
about what cultural attitudes and views. How they shape
and um frame what we, what constitutes our knowledge,
and they're starting to invent different kinds of scientific
inquiry themselves.
Mhm, um, SO I, I guess that we've already
ended up, uh, talking about the goals that these
different groups have and their sort of approach to
democracy. Uh, HOW about education itself? I mean, what
did they have to say about it, the, the
anarchists, the socialists, and so on?
Mm, um, well, in some ways I think that
it's the new left group, the universities and left,
um, group, they, they think most. Uh, CONCRETELY about
education, because many of them are students. So many
of them, I mean, so that initial group, I
mean, just to give you a flavor of, of
who we're talking about here. So the, the first
British New Left is a very. Amorphous movement, it
can really barely be called a movement because it's
got so many different people, and what kind of
holds it together as an idea is that they're
all responding to a few things. Problems within socialism,
which have been long running, but particularly, you know,
within the sort of more extreme radical. Forms of
it, like Marxism. These have been long running problems.
There have been growing tensions, but what brings it
to a head are the events of 1956, um,
where, uh, first of all, you have Khrushchev's secret
speech detailing, um, some of the atrocities committed under
Stalin. And then, just in case anyone thought that
any lessons have been learned. Um, THE Soviet Union
violently suppresses the Hung Hung an uprising in Hungary
by sending in tanks. Um, AND this, it, it
doesn't, I mean, so there's been a lot of
literature saying how terribly shocked everyone was. Um, EVERYONE,
I think it was shocking because it had to
be because Khrushchev made it so public and suddenly,
you know, there was total discreditation of certainly Stalin.
Um, IT was the fact that then the party,
the National Party branches, um, kind of just buried
their heads in the sand over this. They would
not allow any kind of reasonable, kind of democratic
discussion about whether or not the national branch. Branches
should hold the Moscow line on things. Um, SO
there was all these problems already. Then, as we've
already discussed, those who aren't Marxists, um, are still
finding that, well, they're quite disillusioned with what Labour
was like as a party in power. And that's
quite far away from the sort of broader labor,
labor movement goals that they had, and it certainly
was nowhere near as ambitious as many of them
would have liked to have seen. They are nervous
about the kind of, the new road to socialism
that's being put forward by people like Crosland, which
is, again, the kind of British version of this
much more technocratic approach to kind of government, as
sort of government as management. And in the background,
there's that famous. This book by James, uh, germs,
James Burnham, um, which is the Managerial Revolution. Everyone's
just a little bit worried that that's just another
form of total, a kind of liberal form of
totalitarianism. So ultimately this Cold War choice between freedom
and totalitarianism is just not going to exist. It's
going to be a choice between this dictator or
that dictator of different forms, as, as we've been,
as we've been describing. Um, SO, there is kind
of, All that going on. So there's a big
question about, well, what is socialism now anyway, and
what does it stand for and what are its
goals. And then there's just some basic questions as
I've been describing to you about the changes that
are happening in the 1950s, youth culture, the coming
of affluence, um, the shifts in culture that that
brings, the changing social dynamics within Britain post migration
and all that sort of thing. Um, SO you've
got a group of people that are not satisfied
with their existing political language, and you've got a
lot of, and you've got, and they've also got
a lot of questions that their existing ideas of
politics aren't able to cover or accommodate. So that's
how the new left gets born. And one sort
of strand or strain of it is obviously this
sort of comes out of the universities. Um, IT'S
often credited, like, the kind of impetus to sort
of set up a focal point for this large,
kind of expansive movement of people. And that came
from Rafael Samuel, who was a recent graduate from
Oxford, and there was a group of 4 of
them, which was Rafael Samuel. Uh, Stuart Hall, as
we've already mentioned, the Canadian philosopher Charles Taylor, and
then, um, there was another, uh, who was, uh,
uh, sort of, I. His name actually escapes me,
but he was a, a sort of a literary
stu a literature student who joined them. He was
Gabriel was his first name, and uh so they,
they set up the universities in Left Review magazine,
so obviously they're very rooted in the student world,
they're recent graduates themselves, and they instantly, in order
to kind of get their venture off the ground.
Um, AND they eventually, they never see this as
creating a new socialism, which by the way, is
a game that everybody is playing right now. There
are so many new journals, new magazines, new attempts
to redefine what social politics is. It's mushrooming absolutely
all over the place, like I said earlier in
the interview, when I got asked, well, why focus
on these when there was just so much activism
going on right now. Because frankly it was, it
was almost overwhelming how much was sort of popping
up all over the place. And quite often these
enterprises would cooperate together or interact or, or support
each other in a way that they sort of
didn't do in other, in other decades. It was
slightly less collegial in some senses, and a lot
of that has to do because they all shared
the same kind of student networks. Now, um, so
straight away, the, uh, university left Review group know
to work through the universities and they set up
sort of branches of their clubs in collaboration with
existing university labor or socialist clubs. And that's a,
that's an easy win for them, that gets them
an easy audience. Straight away. And there's also this
kind of, it's not just the students, it's this
kind of whole new tier of young dons or
young lecturers and young researchers, particularly those who are
in these kind of newly minted social science subjects,
like sociology, sociology, absolutely. You know, hugely increases in
presence and size. I mean, it kind of borderline
wasn't a thing, um, in the sort of late
40s and then by the 50s, the number of
courses in it just goes through the, goes through
the roof. And then everyone's still sort of struggling
to kind of really define what they mean by
it anyway. Um, AND you have a lot of
these people who are being trained by these older
generations, and the war really does accelerate things here.
Any, I mean, EP Thompson, who was another member
of the New Left, used to say the distance
between, you know, those people that were actually fought
in the war, and even, and the, the sort
of next generation, we're talking in reality, somewhere between
5 to 10 years, nothing. And yet mentally, in
terms of attitudes, it's an absolute world apart. So
you've got this younger generation who just are going
through their education and are just dissatisfied with it,
do not feel that it's supplying them with the
tech uh languages or the kind of categories that
they need to kind of articulate what's going on
in Britain at that point. So. Um, IN some
ways, the left, uh, the new left clubs are
a way to do that and to reimagine that,
and to reimagine a form of political education, and
they're doing this a lot by practical, uh, research.
As I said to you, they're not sitting around
because, you know, reading groups and study groups have
been an absolute mainstay in left wing culture always
and forever. Um, NEVER a more kind of better
read, smarter group of people will you ever, ever
meet. Um, BUT what I think marks out this
group is that they are doing what we would
now call kind of action research or practical research.
They're literally going out into communities, and it's interesting,
Rafael Samuel becomes a really sort of lead pioneering
figure in oral history, um, in the 1970s, 1
of the co-founders of the kind of oral history
journal and things like that, as well as it
being a major feature of the history workshop movement.
Which he is obviously the kind of driving force
behind, but this is all kind of starting right
here in the 1950s. They're going out and they're
just asking people, and, and, you know, in the
archives are full of their old questionnaires and things
like that. They're quite crude in many ways, I
think, you know, that the scientific quality of some
of their questions would be, um. Would be sort
of under doubt, shall we say, but their instinct
is, well, we're, we're having to reinvent how to
do research. As at the same time that we're
trying to find new knowledge because the ways we
have of asking people questions aren't getting us the
things that we need to know in order to
respond to the problems that we have. One of
the interesting dynamics, I didn't feature this in the
book, but I sort of wish I had. Part
of the young new Left group is Philip Abrahams,
whose father is Marc Abrahams, and Mark, Mark Abrahams
is like the doyen of the market research survey.
He literally invents sort of market research studies. He's
an absolute key figure for the Labour Party. Um,
HE'S one of the sort of authors of Must
Labour Lose, which is a very famous pamphlet where
he basically says, well, nowadays all the young people
are future orientated, they find you too old fashioned,
you need to be more modern and modernistic, and
the next thing we know, we've got Harold Wilson
declaring that Labour's going to pursue the white heat
of technology. Now his son Philip Abrahams is part
of the New Left cohort, and a lot of
his articles at this time are incredibly critical about
this approach to sort of, um, question, ask, uh,
research, ques, asking questions, and you're seeing the embryos
of what we would now call that much more.
Uh, CULTURALLY sensitive awareness, how our attitudes and values,
um, fundamentally shape what can even constitute a fact
to us, let alone, um, you know, the kind
of different sort of forms of realities that we
accept or register. So that's certainly all happening in
the, in the new left, sure.
Yeah, no, that's really fascinating. So, I, I have
one last topic I would like to ask you
about. I, I mean, particularly I myself earlier have
already touched a little bit on some of the
issues that people in the 60s particularly cared about
compared to the 50s. So in what ways would
you say the 50s differ from the radicalism of
the 60s?
Sure, I, I think in some ways it's a
really good way to kind of summarize the whole
drift of the book because we're so accustomed, like
again, we started this conversation by talking about um.
Uh, HOW, you know, periods get kind of identities,
and these identity markers sort of live with us
and shape, you know, so nowadays if you want
to kind of, if you're feeling things, and, and
when I wrote this book, I actually very much
had in mind our current moment, and this kind
of, you know, almost like this sort of wordlessness
we have to even try and describe all the
things that are seemingly starting to just kind of
go wrong around us, this kind of. Total inadequacy
of language, um, to sort of, kind of grasp
what's happening. And I think a lot of people
will be tempted to say, well, are these kind
of flat, you know, sort of kind of eerie,
um, confused times, let's look to the 60s, right,
because we all know the stories that there was
sort of slowly but surely the kind of youth
revolution really started to get into swing. Number of
universities increased. Incidentally, again we're still talking about a
tiny elite, um, you know, but nevertheless, a slightly
larger elite than before. And we associate, you know,
the end of the 60s, that, you know, fairly
amazing reaction against Vietnam and America, which was sort
of, you know, and then that rippling off. It's
amazing how things can have sort of symbolic power
like that. In our own age, recent times, it's
been Gaza. Whilst I'm not, obviously Gaza is a
very serious issue, um, and it is sort of
Anyone in their right mind condemns what is very
obviously genocide or genocidal policies, but, um, you know,
sort of for a lot of young people, Gaza
was just part of this web of other things
that are going, you know, that are just. Happening
because power is out of control and in massive
excess, and the, you know, people are increasingly just
so far away from having any sort of control
over what's being done to them, what they're being
asked to do with their lives, you know, everything
from kind of technology. Anyway, that's the sort of,
kind of, you know, point that I'm trying to
make, that sometimes one issue can just set off
what's um, what's a sort of a kind of
chain reaction that's been waiting to happen. And certainly
you see this in the 60s and it comes
with some really iconic images. And also the other
thing is it uses the language of radicalism. Radicalism
was cool, it was the right thing to be
doing. You, I mean, I mentioned earlier. Harold Wilson
gives a speech in 1964. He is the rear,
he is the sort of Labour's back in power,
he's the new Prime Minister, and he commits the
country to modernization, the swinging 1960s. He literally is
legitimizing or licensing. I mean, this sounds dreadful, it
sounds like I'm basically saying all these radical students
were just toeing a party line. In a sense,
they kind of were, you know, there was a
licensed change for change. There wasn't in the 50s,
there was the opposite, so if you were going
to suggest different ways of thinking or describing or
talking. About politics in the 1950s, you were actually
being much more radical because you were completely out
on a limb in doing so. So you had
to be really quite shrewd and clever about how
you were going to do this. There was very
little point, and you see this again quite spectacularly
amongst the anti-nuclear activists, right? They, there's all these
sort of almost quite touching, and they're funny to
read, sort of, uh, kind of. Information circulars to
the people that they're working with, just saying, now,
no duffel coats, no beards, you know, we've got
to look completely respectable, completely normal, apparently in the
1950s, a duffel coat was a sure sign of,
of delinquency, who knew? Paddington Bearby warned. Um, BUT
they are really sort of, you know, I think
this is, and this, the, this aesthetic they've got
of trying to kind of smuggle the radical under
the surface is, I think, you know, kind of
one of the major differences. So they're having to
work that much harder to make, um, outrageous ideas
seem completely reasonable and familiar. It's an amazing kind
of propaganda. I say trick, I do not mean
this kind of badly. What they're trying to do
is code radical ideas into ways that come across
very palatable and familiar to, to members of the
public who might otherwise be instantly disengaged if they
think that these people were just delinquents or young
hooligans or hoodwinks or whatever. So that's one. Um,
AND then in another sense, we obviously associate the
60s, slightly inaccurately, but with the idea of the,
the, the personal is political. This actually comes more
with the women's movement, sort of from the late
60s in America and then, and then on into
the 70s, but already there's this nub of this
idea that, you know, politics is not just what
happens amongst these people in suits in a sort
of parliamentary chamber or whatever, that it's the nuts
and bolts of what's going on. Um, I think
in the 60s this starts to harden a little
bit more into what we would now be more
familiar with calling identity politics, and this starts to
sort of, especially when you've got some of the
divisions amongst the radical groups like the Black Panthers
saying, well, we can't do democracy with you guys
because you don't recognize, you know, the black experience
and the specific kind of domination that involves, and
you're just repeating it. So there is much more
of a kind of identity politics. Style of personal
politics emerging there. In the 1950s, it's still much
more based on this notion of the individual as
a moral agent, as a being that's actually got
to make a private choice about what's right, and
then act on it. So this is again, this
legacy coming through peace, and this notion, like, from
conscientious objectors, and, you know, inspired by a figure
like Gandhi, who I absolutely have to mention very
briefly, because he's so influential on this, this idea
that. Uh, SO the question becoming how does then
one individual and their private objection become a social
movement? Well, it's because you perform this in public
and you show that this one individual act of
solidarity for a solidarity with life against death as
the anarchists used to put it. That actually that,
you know, should start off a ripple effect in
anyone who can empathize or sympathize with that core
um sense of being human. Now obviously, and rightly
so, lots of questions to be asked about that
kind of humanism and who it includes, who it
excludes, but nevertheless I think it's a more, Um,
I think it's a more interesting frame because it
makes us ask, well, how do you do that?
So much of our conventional political imagination keeps relying
on this very pugilistic idea of politics. We get
a group together, we unify them, we all share
the same political identity, perhaps that's class, perhaps that's
race, whatever, and then we get the numbers and
we defeat the opposition. But what happens if you
can't do that? What happens, um, you know, because
obviously the big problem there is that can be
reductive. You might well be working class, but you
might also be a woman and all the other
sort of intersectional elements that people talk about much
more openly now. So there's the, there's the residual
challenge which I think the people I looked at
in the 50s were starting to grapple with, and
which I think is still with us now. If
we all want to be individuals and rich and
complex and combining multiple different kinds of identities, well,
that's great, but how do we organize that into
a powerful social force?
Yeah, I, I mean that last sentence, I was
also actually going to comment that what this makes
me think about, I mean, all of what we
discussed here today and the other things you talk
about in your book is that uh how interesting
it is that uh on the left, particularly and
even in more radical political movements like anarchism, socialism,
communist. AND so on, we can have so many
different perspectives and sometimes people who converge like in
at least 90% of their ideas then get pulled
apart when it comes to the other 10% and
it's really unfortunate because we can have very productive
discussions when it comes to, for example, OK, what
should be private, what should be political, uh look.
Look at individuals in terms of their, uh, on
how they're positioned in terms of their socio-cultural, political,
historical context, and so on and how we can,
uh, mobilize to improve, uh, the life of, uh,
I mean, the vast majority of the population and
so on and so forth and sometimes we, we
just get, uh, fixated on those, uh, tiny, sometimes
it's just a matter of. Of details, sometimes it's
just more of a matter of how people want
to label themselves. I mean, fixing on those more
superficial things instead of noticing that, I mean, maybe
with some disagreements here and there, some concessions here
and there, we could really organize much better on
the left or any other kind of political movement,
I guess.
Mm, I think that's incredibly. Um, INSIGHTFUL of you,
that is true. I mean, one of the standing
jokes about the left is that, um, one of
its sort of greatest weaknesses or tendencies is to
factionalism and as a result to fragmentation. And in
a sense, what I see, kind of, some of
the figures in my book looking at, they, they
don't solve this, but they start to sort of
think, right, well, what if fragmentation, what, what, what
if you could make that a virtue? What if
you could make that actually, a kind of, you
know, Because what makes fragmentation bad, in some ways,
it's not bad to disagree, even if it's something
you're gonna, you know, kind of, the hill you
die on, as it were, you know, um, even
if in, in, in, you know, kind of, to
other people that might look completely bizarre, why on
earth you were going to bat over that particular
issue, sort of thing. But in some ways I,
you know, again, I suppose there's a kind of
desire to imagine what it would look like, and
there is a, there is a label for this.
I'll get to it, um, what it would look
like if we kind of learnt to be fine
with, um, fragmentation and even to make it work
for us. And actually, at the end of the
book, I don't do this in as much detail,
and possibly it's something for later, but looking at
something like the Committee of 100, this is exactly
the process that happens to them. The Committee of
100 sort of come out of the Direct Action
Committee, who are the anti-nuclear activists I've been talking
about. And the Committee of 100 start off very
much like CND, and they want these big centralized
campaigns with huge numbers. But then actually what happens
is, you know, and it's a virtue, right? If
people get involved in things, they get passionate, but
they want to put their slant and their experience,
which is right, it's how it should be. But
that's quite hard when you're trying to organize, you
know, completely joined up movement, you've got everyone wanting
to do things just slightly differently. So the activists
started. To see what they were doing as a
kind of school, and to be pleased when people
wanted to break off and do their own venture.
Now, OK, so again, you've got this problem with,
well, what's more effective? If you've got all these
small little pockets of actions that keep popping up
all over the place, it's what I like to
call the kind of whack a mole approach to
revolution. It just keeps popping up here, there and
everywhere. Um, IS that effective, or actually do we
need that big kind of mass of people marching
down Whitehall saying we don't want nuclear weapons, sort
of thing. Um, AND in some ways, what's interesting
about the Committee of 100 is even after 1963,
when the Non-Proliferation, um, Treaty gets passed between America
and. And USSR and Britain, um, and the kind
of heat goes out, doesn't go away, but goes
out of the nuclear issue. The Committee of 100
you see them pop up. If you were to
do like a kind of sort of family tree
of activism, whatever, they pop up in all the
other different issues. They become leaders, they become organizers,
they take what they learned there, and they pop
up all over the place. And it's because they've
had that taste of doing something, of shaping it,
of, of working. With other people, and then moving
on to something else. That makes them actually, it's,
it's almost like trying to reinvent these new kind
of political characters and roles, um, who are very,
I use terms like picasque, you know, the idea
that these sort of people just pop up in
different episodes in a slightly different role, and organize
something, and then go away again. And it's, um,
I think it's an interesting idea. But essentially what
we're talking about, Ricardo, is radical democracy, which has
always been a hard one, isn't it? It sort
of says everything and nothing. Because it's like radical
democracy is of course much more granular, it's not
representative, it's coming right down to democracy as a
whole way of life that's happening in your workplace,
it's happening in your community, that's happening just in
the whole way you think and interact with the
world. And, but then there's a tension, isn't there?
By that, do we mean that kind of republican
model where we want to build consensus all the
time? Or are we talking about that more agonistic
model where what we really want to do is
argue and defend our differences all the time? Well,
of course it's both, but in what order and
how, and, you know, all manner of questions that
erupt after that. I did not solve that question
in this book, but I, um, I, I offer
it out to everyone else.
Well, maybe in the next one then.
So, yeah,
so the book is again The Radical 50s Activist
Politics in Cold War Britain. I'm of course leaving
a link to it in the description of the
interview. Uh AND Sophie, where can people find your
work on the internet?
Well, I mean, this book, it's, um, it's quite
expensive. So, uh, if you are, if you are
a student, you may be able to get your,
um, friendly university or school or college librarian to
order it for the library. There should be an
e-book copy, so you could possibly access chapters that
way. Um, BUT obviously, if you wanted it, uh,
ordered for your library, that's, that's all good for
me. There is a Spanish translation that will come
out, and hopefully be a little bit more accessible,
and that will come out in the new year.
So for any of your, um, Spanish speaking, uh,
listeners, look out for that. It's, um, being published
by Virus Editorial, which is very exciting. Um, BUT
other than that, I, my various different forms of
work, which is on, um, kind of intellectual history,
uh, political theory and philosophy, they are available in
various forms as articles, as blogs, um, and you
can sort of find all these, uh, by doing
a, a sort of quick, uh, Google Scholar search
or something along those lines. And, uh, I'm sure
it will all pop up by some handy algorithm.
Well, thank you so much for taking the time
to come on the show again. It's always a
pleasure to talk with you. Thank you. Hi guys,
thank you for watching this interview until the end.
If you liked it, please share it, leave a
like and hit the subscription button. The show is
brought to you by Enlights Learning and Development done
differently. Check their website at enlights.com and also please
consider supporting the show on Patreon or PayPal. I
would also like to give a huge thank you
to my main patrons and PayPal supporters, Perergo Larsson,
Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf, Alex, Adam
Cassel, Matthew Whittingberrd, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis, Eric Elena,
John Connors, Philip Forst Connolly. Then Dmitri Robert Windegerru
Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor, Michel Stormir,
Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and Hal Herzognun,
Machael Jonathan Labran, John Yardston, and Samuel Curric Hines,
Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran, David Sloan
Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono Correa. Yannik
Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam Hunt, Pavlostazevski,
Alekbaka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal Adrian Yei
Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall, Edin Bronner,
Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel Pancortez or Suliliski, Scott
Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony Smith, John Wisman. Daniel
Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno, Luke Lovai, Georgios
Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David Williams, Dio Costa,
Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli
Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior. Old Eringbon.
Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff
McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark Kempel, Thomas Dovner,
Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Gelbert, Jessica
Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Ekoriati,
Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van Goler, Alexander Obert,
Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner,
Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean Nelson, Mike
Levin, and Jos Necht. A special thanks to my
producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank Lucas Stink, Tom Vanneden,
Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and
Patrick Tobin, John Carlomon Negro, Al Nick Cortiz, and
Nick Golden, and to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender,
Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie. Thank you for
all.